B. Contrastive Learning
Contrastive learning, as a kind of self-supervised learning
methods, has been widely applied in various fields such as computer vision (CV) [31], natural language processing (NLP) [32],
and graph learning [33]. The basic idea of contrastive learning
is to select appropriate positive and negative pairs, maximizing the agreement between positive pairs and minimizing the
agreement between negative pairs [34]. Zhang et al. proposed
an adaptive-margin-enhanced contrastive learning technique to
learn the global model, thereby enhancing interclass separability [35]. In the field of recommender systems, Hao et al. treated
the structural and semantic information of user–item graphs as
two contrastive views for recommendation and then proposed a
contrastive learning model for graph collaborative filtering [36].
It generates adaptive contrastive views through a metaoptimized
two-step training strategy and enhances the recommendation
performance of the model. Yu et al. created contrastive views by
adding uniform noise to the embedding space [24]. To reduce
computational complexity, this method replaces the final layer
contrast with cross-layer contrast. Lin et al. [37] presented a
prototype-contrastive objective to capture contextual information. Specifically, for each item or user, the positive sample
is the prototype of the cluster to which it belongs, while the
negative sample is the prototype of other clusters. The prototype represents the cluster center and the prototype-contrastive
objective is learned using the expectation–maximization (EM)
algorithm. Additionally, this algorithm applies cross-layer contrasting, treating the corresponding representations output from
the even-numbered layer GNN as positive samples for each user
or item.


We define the structural neighbors as the set of nodes D
connected to node a via higher order paths. Benefiting from
the characteristics of neural networks, the output of the kth
layer of the GNN contains aggregated information from k-hop
neighbors. Thus, we consider the output of the kth layer of the
GNN as the representation of the k-hop neighbors of a node.
Fig. 2 illustrates our proposed structural contrastive learning
method. Because the interaction graph G is a bipartite graph,
a GNN-based model can naturally aggregate information from
homogeneous structural neighbors during even iterations. We
can obtain representations of the homogeneous neighbors of
users or items based on the outputs from even-numbered layers.

These representations allow us to effectively model the relationship between users/items and their homogeneous structural
neighbors.
For user u, we consider the homogeneous nodes on even layers of the local GNN as positive samples, and the homogeneous
neighboring nodes of other users to be negative samples. Using
the InfoNCE [34], we propose a structure-contrastive learning
objective to minimize the distance between these embeddings




where e
(0)
i represents the initial features or embeddings of the
user i, e
(l)
i represents the normalized output of user i at the lth
layer of the GNN, l is an even number. e
(l)
i · e
(0)
i represents the
dot product similarity between them and τ is the temperature
parameter.
We obtain the structural contrastive loss on the item side in
a similar manner


We incorporate the structural contrastive learning loss with
the recommendation loss in (4) to obtain the final loss function.
The final loss function is represented as
L = LBPR + β1(LU
Con + λLV
Con) + β2||Θ||2 (7)
where β1 and β2 are hyperparameters that control the weight
of the structural contrastive loss and the regularization term,
respectively. θ represents GNN model parameters.


